Port the ros2_tracing page from ros-realtime documentation to primary documentation (#3621)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/Advanced/ros2_tracing_trace_and_analyze.rst

Reviewer: You'll need to include this file's relative path in `source/Tutorials/Advanced.rst` so that it gets included in the sidebar and list of tutorials.

Also, I would change the underscores in the file name to dashes just to match pretty much all other files: `ros2_tracing_trace_and_analyze.rst` -> `ros2-tracing-trace-and-analyze.rst`

How to use ros2_tracing to trace and analyze an application
===========================================================

This guide shows how to use `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ to trace and analyze a ROS 2 application.
For this guide, the application will be `performance_test <https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test>`_.

Overview
--------

This guide covers:

1. running and tracing a ``performance_test`` run
2. analyzing the trace data using
   `tracetools_analysis <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis>`_

>    to plot the callback durations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. analyzing the trace data using `tracetools_analysis <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis>`_ to plot the callback durations
```

Prerequisites
-------------

This guide is aimed at real-time systems. See the `real-time system setup guide 
<Real-Time-Operating-System-Setup/Real-Time-Linux/rt_linux_index.md>`_.

> However, the guide will work if you are using a non-real-time system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide is aimed at real-time systems.
See the :doc:`real-time system setup guide <../Miscellaneous/Building-Realtime-rt_preempt-kernel-for-ROS-2>`.
However, the guide will work if you are using a non-real-time system.
```

Then if this PR gets merged before #3756, #3756 will have to update this link.

.. note::

>   This guide was written for ROS 2 Rolling on Ubuntu 22.04. It should work on other ROS 2 distros or Ubuntu versions, but some things might need to be adjusted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This guide was written for ROS 2 Rolling on Ubuntu 22.04.
  It should work on other ROS 2 distros or Ubuntu versions, but some things might need to be adjusted.
```

Installing and building
-----------------------

> Install ROS2 on your Ubuntu or Debian here by following instructions `here <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Installation/Ubuntu-Install-Debians.html>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install ROS 2 by following the :doc:`installation instructions <../../Installation/Ubuntu-Install-Debians>`.
```

> Install ``babeltrace`` and ros2trace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install ``babeltrace`` and ``ros2trace``.
```

.. code-block:: bash

   $ sudo apt-get update

>    $ sudo apt-get install -y python3-babeltrace babeltrace ros-${ROS_DISTRO}-ros2trace ros-${ROS_DISTRO}-tracetools-analysis

Reviewer: I know `${ROS_DISTRO}` is often used in tutorials, but we have special macros in these docs that get replaced with the right distro name: https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/The-ROS2-Project/Contributing/Contributing-To-ROS-2-Documentation.html#macros. It's a bit simpler this way.

Also, `python3-babeltrace` is an indirect dependency of `tracetools_analysis`.

```suggestion
   $ sudo apt-get install -y babeltrace ros-{DISTRO}-ros2trace ros-{DISTRO}-tracetools-analysis
```

Author: Do we want to have it render as "ros-rolling-ros2trace" on the documentation page though? Or is it better to provide something the user can copy-paste regardless of whether they're running rolling, Humble, or Iron?

Reviewer 2: > Do we want to have it render as "ros-rolling-ros2trace" on the documentation page though? Or is it better to provide something the user can copy-paste regardless of whether they're running rolling, Humble, or Iron?

The macros in the site generation will automatically replace `{DISTRO}` with whatever distribution it is being built for.  So this should do the right thing.

> Source the ROS2 installation and verify tracing is enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Source the ROS 2 installation and verify that tracing is enabled:
```

.. code-block:: bash

>    $ source /opt/ros/${ROS_DISTRO}/setup.bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   $ source /opt/ros/{DISTRO}/setup.bash
```

   $ ros2 run tracetools status

You should see ``Tracing enabled`` in the output.

> Then create a workspace, import the ROS 2 Rolling code-block, and clone
> ``performance_test``.

Reviewer: No need to build ROS 2 from source anymore.

```suggestion
Then create a workspace, and clone ``performance_test`` and ``tracetools_analysis``.
```

.. code-block:: bash

   $ cd ~/
   $ mkdir -p tracing_ws/src
   $ cd tracing_ws/src/
   $ git clone https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test.git

>    $ git clone https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis.git

Author: tracetools_analysis doesn't get built, but the callback_duration.ipynb file referenced later is missing from the binaries

   $ cd ..

Install dependencies with rosdep.

.. code-block:: bash

   $ rosdep update
   $ rosdep install --from-paths src --ignore-src -y --skip-keys "fastcdr rti-connext-dds-6.0.1 urdfdom_headers"

> Then build up to ``performance_test`` and configure it for ROS 2. See its
> `documentation <https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test#ros-2-middleware-plugins>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then build and configure ``performance_test`` for ROS 2.
See its `documentation <https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test/-/tree/master/performance_test#performance_test>`_.
```

.. code-block:: bash

>    $ colcon build --packages-up-to performance_test --cmake-args -DPERFORMANCE_TEST_RCLCPP_ENABLED=ON

Reviewer: We don't really need to specify any package selection arguments here.

```suggestion
   $ colcon build --cmake-args -DPERFORMANCE_TEST_RCLCPP_ENABLED=ON
```

Author: The tracetools_analysis repo doesn't need to be built here, is time consuming to do so, and may conflict with the installed binaries

Reviewer: It's all Python so it shouldn't take long, but you're right, we don't need to build it.

Next, we will run a ``performance_test`` experiment and trace it.

Tracing
-------

> -  **(Optional)** Step 0. Start an LTTng session daemon.

Reviewer: I would've used a numbered list here, but it's up to you

>    For userspace tracing, the daemon does not need to be started as
>    ``root``. Note that a non-root daemon will be spawned automatically
>    by ``ros2 trace`` if it is not already running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For userspace tracing, the daemon does not need to be started as ``root``.
   Note that a non-root daemon will be spawned automatically by ``ros2 trace`` if it is not already running.
```

   .. code-block:: bash

      $ lttng-sessiond --daemonize

> -  Step 1: Start Trace

Reviewer: Just a suggestion:

```suggestion
-  Step 1: Trace
```

>    In one terminal, source the workspace and setup tracing. We need to
>    explicitly use the ``--kernel`` option with no values to disable
>    kernel tracing, since we did not install the kernel tracer. When
>    running the command, a list of ROS 2 userspace events will be
>    printed. It will also print the path to the directory that will
>    contain the resulting trace (under ``~/.ros/tracing``). Press enter
>    to start tracing.
> 
>    .. code-block:: bash
> 
>       $ # terminal 1
>       $ cd ~/tracing_ws
>       $ source install/setup.bash
>       $ ros2 trace --session-name perf-test --kernel --list

Reviewer: We don't need to use the `--kernel` option to disable kernel anymore, it's now the default (https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing/commit/bc381f0630ce929fdd9083d3e218ae93dab5df2a).

```suggestion
   In one terminal, source the workspace and set up tracing.
   When running the command, a list of ROS 2 userspace events will be printed.
   It will also print the path to the directory that will contain the resulting trace (under ``~/.ros/tracing``).
   Press enter to start tracing.

   .. code-block:: bash

      $ # terminal 1
      $ cd ~/tracing_ws
      $ source install/setup.bash
      $ ros2 trace --session-name perf-test --list
```

-  Step 2: Run Application

   In a second terminal, source the workspace.

   .. code-block:: bash

      $ # terminal 2
      $ cd ~/tracing_ws
      $ source install/setup.bash

>    Then run the ``performance_test`` experiment (or your own
>    application). We simply create an experiment with a node publishing
>    ~1 MB messages to another node as fast as possible for 60 seconds
>    using the second highest real-time priority so that we don’t
>    interfere with critical kernel threads. We need to run
>    ``performance_test`` as root to be able to use real-time priorities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Then run the ``performance_test`` experiment (or your own application).
   We simply create an experiment with a node publishing ~1 MB messages to another node as fast as possible for 60 seconds using the second highest real-time priority so that we don’t interfere with critical kernel threads.
   We need to run ``performance_test`` as ``root`` to be able to use real-time priorities.
```

   .. code-block:: bash

      $ # terminal 2
      $ sudo ./install/performance_test/lib/performance_test/perf_test -c rclcpp-single-threaded-executor -p 1 -s 1 -r 0 -m Array1m --reliability RELIABLE --max-runtime 60 --use-rt-prio 98

>    If that last command doesn’t work for you (with an error like: “error
>    while loading shared libraries”), run the slightly-different command
>    below. This is because, for security reasons, we need to manually
>    pass ``*PATH`` environment variables for some shared libraries to be
>    found (see `this explanation <https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/251374>`_).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If that last command doesn’t work for you (with an error like: “error while loading shared libraries”), run the slightly-different command below.
   This is because, for security reasons, we need to manually pass ``*PATH`` environment variables for some shared libraries to be found (see `this explanation <https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/251374>`_).
```

   .. code-block:: bash

      $ # terminal 2
      $ sudo env PATH="$PATH" LD_LIBRARY_PATH="$LD_LIBRARY_PATH" ./install/performance_test/lib/performance_test/perf_test -c rclcpp-single-threaded-executor -p 1 -s 1 -r 0 -m Array1m --reliability RELIABLE --max-runtime 60 --use-rt-prio 98

  .. note::
    If you're not using a real-time kernel, simply run:

    .. code-block:: bash

        $ # terminal 2
        $ ./install/performance_test/lib/performance_test/perf_test -c rclcpp-single-threaded-executor -p 1 -s 1 -r 0 -m Array1m --reliability RELIABLE --max-runtime 60

> -  Step 3: Confirm Trace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  Step 3: Validate Trace
```

>    Once the experiment is done, in the first terminal, press enter again
>    to stop tracing. Use ``babeltrace`` to quickly look at the resulting
>    trace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Once the experiment is done, in the first terminal, press enter again to stop tracing.
   Use ``babeltrace`` to quickly look at the resulting trace.
```

   .. code-block:: bash

      $ babeltrace ~/.ros/tracing/perf-test | less

>    The output of the above command is a human-readable version of the
>    raw Common Trace Format (CTF) data, which is a list of trace events.
>    Each event has a timestamp, an event type, some information on the
>    process that generated the event, and the values of the fields of the
>    given event type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The output of the above command is a human-readable version of the raw Common Trace Format (CTF) data, which is a list of trace events.
   Each event has a timestamp, an event type, some information on the process that generated the event, and the values of the fields of the given event type.
```

   Use the arrow keys to scroll, or press q to exit.

   Next, we will analyze the trace.

Analysis
--------

> `tracetools_analysis <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis>`_
> provides a Python API to easily analyze traces. We can use it in a
> `Jupyter notebook <https://jupyter.org/>`_ with
> `bokeh <https://docs.bokeh.org/en/latest/index.html>`_ to plot the
> data. The ``tracetools_analysis`` repository contains a `few sample
> notebooks <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis/-/tree/master/tracetools_analysis/analysis>`__,
> including `one notebook to analyze subscription callback
> durations <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis/-/blob/master/tracetools_analysis/analysis/callback_duration.ipynb>`__.
> 
> For this guide, we will plot the durations of the subscription callback
> in the subscriber node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`tracetools_analysis <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis>`_ provides a Python API to easily analyze traces.
We can use it in a `Jupyter notebook <https://jupyter.org/>`_ with `bokeh <https://docs.bokeh.org/en/latest/index.html>`_ to plot the data.
The ``tracetools_analysis`` repository contains a `few sample notebooks <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis/-/tree/master/tracetools_analysis/analysis>`_, including `one notebook to analyze subscription callback durations <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis/-/blob/master/tracetools_analysis/analysis/callback_duration.ipynb>`_.

For this guide, we will plot the durations of the subscription callback in the subscriber node.
```

Install Jupyter notebook and bokeh, and then open the sample notebook.

.. code-block:: bash

>    $ pip3 install bokeh

Author: The latest version of bokeh is incompatible with tracetools_analysis. Bokeh 2.4.3 will run if you rename all references of "legend" in callback_duration.ipynb to "legend_label", but a mutually compatible version of each should be identified.

Reviewer: Will be fixed by https://github.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis/pull/7.

   $ jupyter notebook ~/tracing_ws/src/tracetools_analysis/tracetools_analysis/analysis/callback_duration.ipynb

This will open the notebook in the browser.

> Replace the value for the ``path`` variable in the second cell to the
> path to the trace directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace the value for the ``path`` variable in the second cell to the path to the trace directory:
```

.. code-block:: python

   path = '~/.ros/tracing/perf-test'

> Run the notebook by clicking the *Run* button for each cell. Running the
> cell that does the trace processing might take a few minutes on the
> first run, but subsequent runs will be much quicker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the notebook by clicking the *Run* button for each cell.
Running the cell that does the trace processing might take a few minutes on the first run, but subsequent runs will be much quicker.
```

You should get a plot that looks like this:

.. image:: ./images/ros2_tracing_guide_result_plot.png
  :alt: callback durations result plot
  :align: center

> We can see that most of the callbacks take less than 0.01 ms, but there
> are some outliers taking over 0.02 or 0.03 ms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see that most of the callbacks take less than 0.01 ms, but there are some outliers taking over 0.02 or 0.03 ms.
```

Conclusion
----------

> This guide showed how to install tracing-related tools and build ROS 2
> with tracing instrumentation. Then it showed how to trace a
> `performance_test <https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test>`_
> experiment using
> `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ and plot the
> callback durations using
> `tracetools_analysis <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis>`_.
> 
> For more trace analyses, take a look at the `other sample notebooks
> <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis/-/tree/master/tracetools_analysis/analysis>`_
> and the `tracetools_analysis API documentation
> <https://ros-tracing.gitlab.io/tracetools_analysis-api/master/tracetools_analysis/>`_.
> The `ros2_tracing design document
> <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing/blob/master/doc/design_ros_2.md>`_
> also contains a lot of information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide showed how to install tracing-related tools.
Then it showed how to trace a `performance_test <https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test>`_ experiment using `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ and plot the callback durations using `tracetools_analysis <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis>`_.

For more trace analyses, take a look at the `other sample notebooks <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis/-/tree/master/tracetools_analysis/analysis>`_ and the `tracetools_analysis API documentation <https://ros-tracing.gitlab.io/tracetools_analysis-api/master/tracetools_analysis/>`_.
The `ros2_tracing design document <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing/blob/master/doc/design_ros_2.md>`_ also contains a lot of information.
```

How to use ros2_tracing to trace and analyze an application
===========================================================

> This guide shows how to use
> `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ to trace and
> analyze a ROS 2 application. For this guide, the application will be
> `performance_test <https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test>`_.

Reviewer: We usually put each sentence on a separate line (here and everywhere else) and don't truncate lines.

```suggestion
This guide shows how to use `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ to trace and analyze a ROS 2 application.
For this guide, the application will be `performance_test <https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test>`_.
```

Overview
--------

This guide covers:

1. installing tracing-related tools and building ROS 2 with the core

>    instrumentation enabled

Reviewer: This is not required now; the instrumentation is included by default: https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/How-To-Guides/Building-ROS-2-with-Tracing.html

I know you're just porting this tutorial, but this should be updated. I can take care of it, unless you want to do it.

2. running and tracing a ``performance_test`` run
3. analyzing the trace data using
   `tracetools_analysis <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis>`_
   to plot the callback durations

Prerequisites
-------------

This guide is aimed at real-time systems. See the `real-time system setup guide 
<Real-Time-Operating-System-Setup/Real-Time-Linux/rt_linux_index.md>`_.
However, the guide will work if you are using a non-real-time system.

.. note::

>   This guide was written for ROS 2 Rolling on Ubuntu 20.04. It should work on other ROS 2 distros or Ubuntu versions, but some things might need to be adjusted.

Reviewer: Same here, I can test on Rolling with Ubuntu 22.04 and update this.

Author: I tested it and this guide works on Rolling on 22.04 as of my latest commit, although there are some compatability issues between the latest tracingtools-analysis and bokeh

Installing and building
-----------------------

First, make sure you have `installed all dependencies for ROS 2

> Rolling <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Installation/Ubuntu-Development-Setup.html>`_.

Reviewer: We don't need a _development_ setup anymore, so we can point to the standard Ubuntu Debian installation page: https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Installation/Ubuntu-Install-Debians.html

Install `LTTng <https://lttng.org/docs/>`__ as well as ``babeltrace``.
We will only install the LTTng userspace tracer.

.. code-block:: bash

   $ sudo apt-get update

>    $ sudo apt-get install -y lttng-tools liblttng-ust-dev python3-lttng python3-babeltrace babeltrace

Reviewer: Only `babeltrace` is required now; the rest get installed as part of ROS 2.

Author: Added ros2trace and tracetools-analysis as part of this install step. They don't need to be built from source, but aren't installed by default.

Then create a workspace, import the ROS 2 Rolling code-block, and clone
``performance_test`` and ``tracetools_analysis``.

.. code-block:: bash

   $ cd ~/
   $ mkdir -p tracing_ws/src
   $ cd tracing_ws/

>    $ vcs import src/ --input https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ros2/ros2/master/ros2.repos

Reviewer: This can be removed, since we don't need to re-build ROS 2 from source.

   $ cd src/
   $ git clone https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test.git
   $ git clone https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/tracetools_analysis.git
   $ cd ..

Install dependencies with rosdep.

.. code-block:: bash

   $ rosdep update
   $ rosdep install --from-paths src --ignore-src -y --skip-keys "fastcdr rti-connext-dds-6.0.1 urdfdom_headers"

Then build up to ``performance_test`` and configure it for ROS 2. See its
`documentation <https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test#ros-2-middleware-plugins>`_.
We also need to build ``ros2trace`` to set up tracing using the
``ros2 trace`` command and ``tracetools_analysis`` to analyze the data.

.. code-block:: bash

>    $ colcon build --packages-up-to ros2trace tracetools_analysis performance_test --cmake-args -DPERFORMANCE_TEST_RCLCPP_ENABLED=ON

Reviewer: Don't need to build `ros2trace`, but we do need to install it (`ros-{DISTRO}-ros2trace`).

We'll need to source the installation before building here.

Author: Added to the list of prereqs to install, along with tracetools_analysis. The latter doesn't need to be built, but some sample jupyter notebooks are only found in the source repository

You should see the following message once ``tracetools`` is done
building:

.. code-block:: bash

   LTTng found: tracing enabled

This confirms that LTTng was properly detected and that the

> instrumentation built into the ROS 2 core is enabled.

Reviewer: We won't see this if we don't build ROS 2 from source, but we can replace this with running `ros2 run tracetools status` and make sure that the output is "Tracing enabled"

Author: Added this step after installing the ros2trace binaries
